ESE-650 Project 4
Notes on Interpreting Wheel Encoder Data

The platform, used in this project, is equipped with four magnetic
encoders. Each encoder has two output channels with offset phase with
respect to each other, which makes it possible to determine the
direction of rotation (as opposed to single output encoders). A
microcontroller is used to interpret the total of 8 channels of encoder
pulses and for each of the four wheels, it simply counts the number of
transitions on the encoder output channels, adding 1 or subtracting 1
from the counter for each transition, depending on the direction of
rotation. In other words, rotation of the wheel will trigger a state
transition of the encoder outputs (from high to low or from low to high)
and based on which of the two channels transitions first, the direction
of rotation can be deduced. Also, for each such transition the
corresponding wheelâ€™s encoder counter is either incremented or
decremented accordingly.

As the robot moves, the microcontroller continuously updates the four
encoder counters and when the encoder information is requested for
processing, the latest accumulated counts are returned and the counters
are reset back to zero. Hence, while the robot is stationary, the
encoder counts will always read zero. In this project, the encoder
information was requested at roughly 40Hz, close to the scan rate of the
lidar. Each encoder request is time-stamped so that it can be properly
synchronized with lidar data.

In order to calculate the travelled distance for a single wheel, the
encoder counts should be accumulated over time. Essentially, a single
count translates directly to X meters travelled (depending on resolution
of the encoder and wheel diameter). So if we had five consecutive
encoder measurements of a single wheel equal to
[0, 1, 0, -2,3], the wheel has travelled a net distance of 2*X (if we
make a simplifying assumption that the wheel motion is restricted to one
dimension just for this small example).

